*********************
Building applications
*********************

Select the icon `Build Main: sdc.adb` on the toolbar (fourth icon from the
right): this will launch a complete build of the *sdc* application. Note also
that you can use a key binding directly instead of this tool bar button
(:kbd:`F4`), or use the corresponding menu item `Build->Project->sdc.adb`. If
you use the menu item, an extra intermediate dialog is displayed showing the
actual command line that will be used by GPS. Pressing :kbd:`Execute` will
launch the build as well.

The build has generated a number of errors in a new window: the *Locations*
tree, displayed in the bottom area. The errors are also highlighted in the
corresponding source editor.

GPS has automatically jumped to the first error message (*sdc.adb, 28:6  :
(style) bad indentation*), at the line (28) and column (6) of the error.

Fix the error by hand by inserting a space.

Now you can fix the next error by moving the cursor to the line 30 (press the
:kbd:`down` arrow twice), and by using :kbd:`Ctrl-Tab` (press first the
:kbd:`Control` key, and then the :kbd:`Tab` key on your keyboard): this key
combination asks the source editor to automatically re-indent the current line.

Note that on some window managers or desktop environments, :kbd:`Ctrl-Tab` is
already defined. If this is the case, you can change this shortcut from the key
shortcuts dialog (menu `Edit->Key shortcuts`, `Menus` section, `/Edit/Format
Selection` item).

You can then fix all the remaining errors by selecting the whole block (from
line 28 to line 40) and pressing :kbd:`Ctrl-Tab`. To select a block, you can
either click on the left mouse button and select the area while holding the
button, or using the keyboard by pressing the :kbd:`Shift` key and moving the
cursor using the :kbd:`Up` or :kbd:`Down` keys.

Press the :kbd:`F4` key to build again. GPS will automatically save the
modified files, and start a build. This behavior (automatic saving of files
before building) can be configured in the preferences dialog.

If you look at the bottom right of the GPS window, you will notice that a
progress bar has appeared, displaying the current number of files compiled, and
the number of remaining files. This progress bar disappears when the build is
finished.

This should now report a successful build.
